## Read 87: Accessing GPT-4 level Mathematical Olympiad Solutions Via Monte Carlo Tree Self-refine with Llama-3 8B: A technical report, by Zhang et al from Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory

https://arxiv.org/pdf/2406.07394

The authors of this paper introduce a Monte-Carlo Tree Search like method to enhance model generation. They call it Monte-Carlo Tree Self-Refined, shortened as MCTSr.

Their method is based solely on prompting the model and does not modify its weight, yet greatly enhances the results.

How?
1- Generate a root node through naive answers or a dummy one
2- Use a value function Q to rank answers that were not expanded, select the best greedily
3- Optimize answer through generating a feedback, and then exploit it
4- Compute the Q value of the answer
5- Update value of parent nodes
6- Identify candidate nodes for expansion, and use UCT formula to update all nodes for iterating again
7- Iterate until max steps are reached

Value function Q is actually prompting the model to reward its answer. Model is prompted several times and its answers are averaged. Backpropagation and UCT formulas can be found within the paper.

The authors then evaluate 4 rollouts and 8 rollouts MCTSr on a Llama-3 8B and compare it to GPT-4, Claude 3 Opus and Gemini-1.5 Pro on mathematical problems. 

They first find out such sampling greatly increases performances on both GSM8k and MATH datasets, reaching Frontier-models level of performances in GSM8k (still below in MATH, but greatly improved). 

The authors then evaluate the models on harder benchmarks. MCTSr improves model performance across all of them. They notice that on Math Odyssey, the 8-rollout MCTSr is on the level of GPT-4 !

Prompts can be found within the appendix.
Code is open-sourced at: https://github.com/trotsky1997/MathBlackBox

Personal Thoughts: While this research remains on preliminary stage, the results are quite impressive for results they get only by prompting. Still tells us there’s a lot of stuff to discover even solely with LLMs!