##  Read 115: Meta-Rewarding Language Models: Self-Improving Alignment with LLM-as-a-Meta Judge, by @WthTiao and @WeizheY from @AIatMeta, @nyuniversity and @ucberkeley

https://arxiv.org/pdf/2407.19594

The authors on this paper follow on a previous paper from Meta about Self-Rewarding Language Model. This work had model generating answers and attributing rewards to these answers, which were then ranked and used for DPO.

Here, a modification is added to this: model is both trained using this actor reward modeling, but its judgement capacity is also made to be improved. 

When the model generates answers, two judgements are generated, and a meta judge assigns a winner between those two judgements which are then used as well for the DPO training!

Additionally:
- For actor DPO dataset generation, length control is applied to avoid model generating overly verbose answers.
- For judge DPO dataset, rewards are not directly output from the model: they are instead, for each original response of the model, estimated solving an optimization problem on a battle matrix, which was created from pairwise judgement selections for one answer. Length control filter is also applied to the answers to avoid optimization for overly verbose answers.

The authors then experience on Llama-3-8B for 4 iterations on 5000 different prompts each. For the 2 first, both actor and judge models are trained, while for the 2 last, only actor model is subjected to DPO. Additional training details can be found within the paper.

On AlpacaEval 2, results of the model are great. It beats GPT-4, and goes way beyond the Self-Rewarding results, not converging after 3 iterations! Improvement also happens over ArenaHard benchmarks.

Some notes from the appendix: Improvement happens but very little for MTBench, converging between iteration 2 and 3. Judge correlation with human is at its best at iteration 2, which is the last for which the model is trained as a meta-judge.

Additional details can be found within the result sections and appendix, which are very worth the read.

Personal Thoughts: While fully online self-improvement might not be fully reached, this paper provides an interesting question: can models improve themselves using their own data? Studies claim that too much self-generated data yields to a destruction of the models’ capacities, but the level of the authors seem like an interesting middle ground. A work to follow!