## Read 142: Eliminating thoughts Tokens from CoT-prompts: Training LLMs to reason in a continuous latent space, by @Ber18791531 et al from @AIatMeta

https://arxiv.org/pdf/2412.06769v1

The authors of the paper introduce COCONUT (Chain of Continuous Thoughts) as a way to replace the CoT thought output tokens by latent thoughts. Basically, what the authors do is replace step tokens by a stream of last state outputs, taken as new embeddings for as long as the model is allowed to think before answering a query.

How they finetune a model to think that way is the following:
- First finetune model on CoT output
- Then, train for multiple stages of training: for k-th stage, have k x c latent thoughts where c is the amount of thoughts replacing a step, and n-k steps of the CoT output that remain
- Flexibility can be done for the process : selecting fixed amount of steps to truncate, then adding all of the others as a fixed amount of latent thoughts ; staying for a certain amount of time in the final stage… a lot of the process can be worked around and specifically tuned forces

Regarding inference after training: a <bot> token is added to begin thought process, and an <eot> token is appended after a fixed amount of thoughts.

This procedure is tested on GPT-2 on two datasets : GSM8k  (small arithmetic problems) and a subset of ProntoQA (multi-hop questions) containing 5-hop questions. The authors also reframe ProntoQA into ProsQA, a DAG-version of ProntoQA where nodes are entities or concepts linked using the information of ProntoQA questions.

GPT-2 is thus trained on those datasets and the generation method is compared to both CoT-based generation, generation without CoT, and generation with other training methods that either internalize CoT or add intermediate steps.

Results are as follows: method is on par with CoT for a much lower amount of generated tokens, and a bit better than iCoT, for a slightly higher number of generated tokens… with only two thoughts per step!

The authors perform then an extensive investigation of the model’s process, and infer that the latent thoughts allow the model to perform exploration similar to BFS ; correlated by observed probabilities regarding node predictions on ProsQA in several cases.

Additional prompts, algorithms and other details can be found within the appendix.

Overall a very interesting paper, as it shows promising performance on a reasoning-like process without outputting any tokens of thought, on a model as small as GPT-2. Would love to see how it scales with a better model! And I think that it could be very well trained on Gemini 2.0 Flash Thinking latent thoughts… 👀